+++
title = "Haskell Types"
author = ["ksam"]
date = 2021-07-28
lastmod = 2022-01-04T15:20:23-05:00
draft = false
slug = "haskell-types"
description = "Notes on types in Haskell"
+++

## Custom Data Types {#custom-data-types}

Defining custom data types is akin to or C++'s or Rust's Structs.

To define a custom data type use the `data` keyword.

```haskell
data TypeConstructor = ValueConstructor Argument
                       deriving (Typeclass)
```

-   The `TypeConstructor` is the name of the type, and use it when writing a type
    declaration or signature.
-   The `ValueConstructor` is the keyword to use when constructing a instance of
    that type.
-   There can be any number of `Argument` where each is the name of some actual
    type.
-   New data types can also optionally derive from multiple [Typeclasses](#typeclasses), separated by commas.


## Algebraic Data Types {#algebraic-data-types}

An algebraic data type has more than one value constructor. Each alternative (or
case) represents a possible value of the type constructor. Each alternative can
have different numbers of arguments and different arguments altogether.

These are well suited to use as enums as well, just make sure to derive from `Eq` and `Show`.


## Type Synonyms {#type-synonyms}

Type synonyms allow for making aliases to other types for specificity. It can
create a shorter name for a more verbose type. It does not declare a new type
like [Custom Data Types](#custom-data-types) do.


## Typeclasses {#typeclasses}


## Record Syntax {#record-syntax}

Instead of defining a data type with the `data` keyword like when normally
creating [Custom Data Types](#custom-data-types) and having to write individual accessor methods for
each field, Haskell provides record syntax that will automatically create them
for you.

```haskell
data TypeConstructor = ValueConstructor {
                                        ArgumentName  :: ArgumentType,
                                        ArgumentName2 :: ArgumentType2
                                        } deriving (Typeclass)
```

With this syntax the functions `ArgumentName` and `ArgumentName2`, with types of
`TypeConstructor -> ArgumentType` and `TypeConstructor -> ArgumentType2`
respectively, will be created.

The normal syntax for creating a value of the type still applies, but with
record syntax, you can also alternatively specify field name and value pairs in
a custom order.

```haskell
value = ValueConstructor {
                         ArgumentName2 = val,
                         ArgumentName = val2
                         }
```


## Parameterized Types {#parameterized-types}
