+++
title = "The Beginning"
date = "2022-06-13T23:06:00-05:00"
author = "ksam"
authorTwitter = "" #do not include @
cover = ""
tags = ["thoughtpiece", "beginnings"]
keywords = ["beginning", "why"]
description = "The end. In my opinion, that's the easiest part of a piece to write. You've already figured out where you're going and you're already halfway there. The beginning, however? That's where the challenge comes in."
showFullContent = false
readingTime = true
draft = false
slug = "000"
+++

## Prologue 

The end. In my opinion, that's the easiest part of a piece to write. You've already figured out where you're going and you're already halfway there. The beginning, however? That's where the challenge comes in.

With a beginning, you make your first decision. You set a starting point that frames the rest of the story. It's a monumental milestone that, at least for me, carries a significant amount of weight behind it.

I've written this beginning {{<sidenote text="more than" id="times" >}}Just how many times and how long its taken is something we'll gloss over{{</sidenote>}} a couple of times. I've actually even published a version of this already. But all of those versions felt just a little bit off, so this time I'm taking a slightly different approach --- I'm going to take my own advice. 

## The Beginning (for real this time)

Welcome to my first {{<sidenote text="post" id="post">}}Is this a blog? What even <i>makes</i> a blog?{{</sidenote>}}! These posts will cover on a topic that interests me. This could be anything from a [thoughtpiece](/tags/thoughtpice) to a cool solution I've found to a problem I've been having. Most posts will revolve around software development, Linux, and cybersecurity. I'll try post one every week, but let's just say we'll see how that goes. 

Now we turn to a bit more of a fun question: why?

## The Middle

I want to do this for a couple of reasons: 

### Open Knowledge

I have learned *so* much from sites like StackOverflow and other forums. Sometimes the only place I've been able to find answers are long dead forum posts from years ago or on someone's personal website where they mention off-hand the exact information I need. They've been the saving grace of hours of work or research I've done to solve a specific bug or setup issue. 

One of my goals in writing these posts and sharing this information is to give back. It's to be there just in case someone runs into the same bug or setup issue. 

### Lots of Pots 

A while ago, I came across this {{<sidenote text="story" id="story">}}Is it a good story? Yes. Is it from a tumblr screenshot? Maybe.{{</sidenote>}}:

> There was an experiment a professor did. I think it was pottery students. He did an experiment of “quality” vs “quantity”. One half of the class he told; you have to make as many pots as possible. Good pots, bad pots, whatever. The more pots you make, the higher your grade.
>
> The other half of the class were told, “you can make only one pot”. But that pot had to be perfect. The quality had to be high; the highest quality pot would get the best mark.
>
> But when it came to the grading, they noticed something weird.
>
> All the best quality pots were in the ‘quantity’ group.
> 
> The guys who were literally churning out pots, trying to make as many as possible, not concentrating on the quality. But every pot they made, made them better at making pots. By the end of the month (I think it was a month) - they had some pretty awesome pots coming out, because they enjoying finding all the ways and all the things they could do to make all their pots. Where as the ‘quality’ guys had spent their time reading up on pots, and technique, and researching and planning; which was all great but they’d had no further practice at actually making pots.

As cheesy as it sounds, it's stuck with me since. I find that it's a good thing to keep in mind --- that you can only really get better by first being worse. These posts are my effort at being worse. I want to be good effectively and clearly communicating. I can't get good at doing that without actually doing it first.

### Why not?

The final reason why I wanted to write these posts is just that: because I wanted to. It's something I've been thinking about and seen some absolutely stunning examples of it, so I started to do it. That's it.

## The End

So there it is: the end of the beginning. I'm excited to see where this goes from here --- I've got no clue myself. I plan to figure it out as I go. Besides, if I already knew how to do it, what would be the fun in this?

With that being said, here's to more beginnings and the infinite possibilities they bring. 

until the next one,  
ksam

**P.S.** 
If you've got any feedback, comments, or suggestions, I'd love to hear from you. Feel free to [contact me](/contact)! If you'd like to learn more about me and what I've done, then check out the [home page](/)
